Prolonged exposure to extreme cold
can damage skin and underlying tissue,
known as frostbite.
At first, your skin may turn red,
and then white or pale
as your body reduces
blood flow to your extremities
to maintain your core temperature
and to protect vital organs,
such as your heart and brain,
from becoming cold and damaged.
To reduce blood flow,
the blood vessels close to the
skin’s surface narrow.
To preserve blood flow and function
of your hands and feet,
the blood vessels alternately widen and narrow
but with continued exposure,
they permanently constrict.
About 60 percent of your body weight is water.
When skin heat drops too low,
water between the skin cells forms ice crystals
and is also lost from inside the cells.
Both cause skin cells to die.
Continued exposure also damages blood vessels
so that blood flow is further impeded,
small clots form
and the vessels leak.
Depending on the severity,
frostbitten skin may turn purple
or blue as it rewarms,
or black and hard as tissue dies.